Building Financial Insights for a Chatbot

In this exercise, we are going to manually gather financial data, analyze it using Python, and uncover important trends that would help in developing an AI-powered financial chatbot.

Follow these simple steps carefully:

Step 1: Data Extraction

First, we will collect real financial data from official 10-K filings.

Where to go:

Visit the SEC's EDGAR database.
Search for:
Microsoft
Tesla
Apple
What to extract for each company (for the last three fiscal years):

Total Revenue
Net Income
Total Assets
Total Liabilities
Cash Flow from Operating Activities
Organizing the data:

Compile the extracted numbers neatly into an Excel spreadsheet.
This will make it easier when we move to analysis.
Step 2: Setting Up the Python Environment (Jupyter Notebook)

Before we start analyzing, we need to prepare our environment.

Install Jupyter Notebook (if you haven’t already):

pip install notebook
Launch Jupyter Notebook:

jupyter notebook
This will open Jupyter in your web browser.

Create a New Notebook:

Inside Jupyter, click "New" → "Python 3" to create a fresh notebook for this project.
Step 3: Python Analysis Using Pandas

We are now ready to dive into the data analysis part.

Import pandas:

At the top of your notebook, import the pandas library:

import pandas as pd
Load the data:

Save your Excel file as a CSV file for easier handling.
Load it into a DataFrame:
df = pd.read_csv('path_to_your_csv_file.csv')
Analyze year-over-year changes:

Calculate the percentage growth for key metrics like this:

df['Revenue Growth (%)'] = df.groupby(['Company'])['Total Revenue'].pct_change() * 100
df['Net Income Growth (%)'] = df.groupby(['Company'])['Net Income'].pct_change() * 100
Feel free to explore additional analyses like:

Asset growth
Liability changes
Cash flow variations
You can also group and compare companies to spot interesting patterns.

Step 4: Summarize and Document Your Findings

Throughout your Jupyter Notebook:

Use Markdown cells to explain your thought process, observations, and conclusions.
Summarize what you notice about each company — for example, how Tesla’s cash flow changed, or how Apple's revenue growth trend looks.
Focus on turning raw numbers into meaningful insights.

Final Outcome:

By following this flow, you’ll build a clear and structured financial analysis — the kind of foundation that can feed into a smart financial chatbot.

You'll also strengthen your skills in:

Extracting real-world data
Analyzing trends using pandas
Communicating insights clearly and professionally
Enjoy the process and explore different ways to make your analysis even richer!
